Introduction
============

Pathagar is a simple book server for schools where there is little or no internet. 
For more information, see [this presentation](http://www.slideshare.net/sverma/pathagar-a-book-server) by Prof. Sameer Verma.
To get involved, please join our [mailing list](http://mail.archive.org/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo/pathagar).
For some of the history of the project, read this [blogpost at OLPC-SF](http://www.olpcsf.org/node/126)

Setting up Pathagar using Fabric (BETA)
=======================================

Fabric is the most convenient way to setup Pathagar on your server.

To setup pathagar using fabric you first need to install Fabric and Virtualenv. 

Note: If you are running a red-hat based machine. Replace "ubuntu" in the following commands/paths to fedora and follow the same procedure.

After installing edit `deploy/ubuntu/fabric.py` , `deploy/ubuntu/settings.conf` and `deploy/ubuntu/virtualhost.conf` to configure the server according to your needs.

Great! Now you are ready to deploy.

First we need to create the directories that will hold pathagar's code, logs and environment. To do this run the following command:

`fab ubuntu bootstrap` 

Now we need to configure apache and let it know about the location of the files. To do that run:

`fab ubuntu deploy`

Perfect! Now we have apache running our server through mod_wsgi. Now we need to setup our databases.

`fab ubuntu create_db`

`fab ubuntu setup_db`

Done! You should now have a working instance of pathagar running on your server.

Please note that our fabric scripts are still under beta. If you come across any problems please feel free to ask for help.

OPDS
====

It uses the OPDS spec:

http://opds-spec.org

Books can be added via the admin interface, as well as via the command
line, in batch (using CSV files, JSON files or a directory with EPUB
files), through the command:

    python manage.py addbooks
  
            OR
            
    python manage.py addepub

Pathagar runs on the python web app framework Django.  It is known to work in Django 1.3 and 1.4.


## Loading content

Once installed, Pathagar contains no books. You can upload individual books
through the UI or you can bulk load them by following the instructions below.


### From Internet Archive

You can download book files from Internet Archive. First you need to create
a user and a bookmarks list. Once created, you'll fetch the book files on your
bookmarks list with the `fetch_ia_item` command.

    python manage.py fetch_ia_item --username=<your-username> --out=books.json

This can take a while depending on your internet connection and how many books
you have on your bookmarks list. You might want to go grab a coffee and take
a stretch break.

Once complete, you'll have a `books.json` file which you can use with the
`addbooks` command.

    python manage.py addbooks --json books.json

Learn more about the `addbooks` command below.


### addbooks command

If you have your books already with metadata described in a file, use the
`addbooks` command to import them into Pathagar.


#### CSV format

To add books from a CSV file:

    python manage.py addbooks books.csv

The format of the CSV file is like:

```
"Path to ebook file","Title","Author","Description"
```

If you need to add more fields, please use the JSON file.


#### JSON format

To add books from a JSON file:

    python manage.py addbooks --json books.json

The format of the JSON file is like::

    [
      {
        "book_path": "Path to ebook file",
        "cover_path": "Path to cover image",
        "a_title": "Title",
        "a_author": "Author",
        "a_status": "Published",
        "a_summary": "Description",
        "tags": "set, of, tags"
      },
      ...
    ]

You can add more fields.  Please refer to the Book model.


Dependencies
============

* Python
* Django
* django-taggit
* django-sendfile

Quickstart
==========

* Install mysql

In Fedora

    sudo yum install -y mysql mysql-devel

* Install requirements

    sudo pip install -r requirements.pip


* In the Pathagar folder, copy `local_settings.example.py` to
  `local_settings.py` and edit it to suite your needs and environment.

* In the Pathagar folder, run

    python manage.py syncdb

  You will be asked to create an admin user during this stage.

* To run the server, run

    python manage.py runserver

  This starts a server listening on localhost, port 8000

  If the port 8000 is in use, can change the port (by example to 8081) running

    python manage.py runserver 0.0.0.0:8081

* With your browser, access http://localhost:8000 and see if the index
  page comes up. If it comes up, click on "Add books" in the footer to
  start adding books. You will be asked for a username/password. This is
  the admin username/password you supplied while running syncdb.

  NOTE: You can also mass add books via the command line through CSV files
  or by simply pointing to a directory with a set of EPUB files.

* To run the server in a production environment, look at Django deployment
  docs at : http://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.4/howto/deployment/
